Stateless

Definition: A system or protocol is stateless when each request is independent and does not rely on previous interactions. The server does not store any session information between requests.
Example: HTTP is stateless because every request from a client to a server is treated as a new interaction.


What is State?

Definition: State refers to stored information about the current status or context of an interaction or process. In computing, state often means data retained between operations (e.g., user session, variables).
Example: A shopping cart in an e-commerce site represents state because it remembers selected items across multiple page requests.


How is HTTPS Secured?

HTTPS (HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure) uses:

1. TLS/SSL encryption to secure data in transit.
2. Authentication via digital certificates to verify the server’s identity.
3. Integrity checks to ensure data is not tampered with.


Process: When a browser connects to a server using HTTPS, they perform a handshake to establish an encrypted channel using asymmetric and symmetric cryptography.


What is JSON?
Definition

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a lightweight data-interchange format that is easy for humans to read and write and easy for machines to parse and generate.

History

Introduced by Douglas Crockford in early 2000s as a subset of JavaScript syntax for data exchange.
Became widely adopted for APIs and web services due to simplicity and language independence.

Format

Text-based, uses key-value pairs.
Data types: strings, numbers, booleans, arrays, objects, and null.
Example:
JSON{  "name": "Alice",  "age": 25,  "skills": ["Python", "Java"]}Show more lines


Advantages

Human-readable and easy to understand.
Language-independent and widely supported.
Lightweight compared to XML.

Disadvantages

No support for comments.
Limited data types (cannot represent complex structures like dates without conventions).
Verbose for very large datasets compared to binary formats.

Alternatives to JSON

XML (Extensible Markup Language): Older, more verbose, supports schemas.
YAML (YAML Ain’t Markup Language): More human-friendly, supports comments.